# Structural Causal Models
**Definition 1** (Structural causal model; Pearl, 2009). A structural causal model (SCM) is a 4-tuple $\mathcal{M}=\langle U,V,\mathcal{F},\mathbb{P}\rangle$ where
+ $U$ is a set of exogenous variables that are determined by factors outside the model.
+ $V = \lbrace V_1, \cdots , V_n\rbrace$ is a set of endogenous variables that are determined by factors in the model.
+ $\mathcal{F}$ is a set of functions $\lbrace f_1, \cdots , f_n\rbrace$ such that each $f_i$ is a mapping from  (the respective domains of) $U_i\cup Pa_i$ to $V_i,$ where $U_i\subseteq U$ is some subset of $U$ whose elements are related to the variation of $V_i,$ $Pa_i\subseteq V\backslash V_i$ includes the parents of $V_i$ in the underlying causal DAG, and entire set of $F$ forms a mapping from $U$ to $V.$ In other words, $f_i$ assigns a value to the corresponding $V_i\in V,\ v_i\gets f(u_i,pa_i).$
+ $\mathbb{P}$ is a probability function defined over the domain of $U,$ which creates variation in the endogenous variables $V$.

Every SCM $\mathcal{M}$ defines a directed acyclic graph (DAG) $\mathcal{G}(\mathcal{M}) = (V,E)$ (denoted as $\mathcal{G}$ for simplicity). Node in $\mathcal{G}$ correspond to endogenous variables in $V,$ and directed edges $E$ emit from the set of parent nodes $Pa_i$ towards $V_i.$ This causal DAG specifies the causal mechanism according to which the data are generated.

**Remark.** In a fully specfied SCM, any counterfactual quantity can be immediately constructed explicitly by variables from the underlying causal mechanism. These quantities are taken as axiomatic primitves in the potential outcome framework.

**Definition 2** (Intervention). Interventions in structural causal models are carried out by removing individual functions in $F$ from the model and fixing their left-hand side variables at some constant value. Mathematically, such an action is denoted by the operator $\mathrm{do}(\cdot).$

**Analytical Example.** Consider the directed acyclic graphs representing structural causal models. 
